Gear Academy: Learn How to Become an Expert in Building Decentralized
Applications

Gear Foundation is delighted to introduce its new educational
initiative, Gear Academy. Gear's first offering - the 'Gear Smart
Contract Developer' course â€“ will be free, providing an in-depth
introduction to developing decentralized applications with Rust on
networks like Vara Network.

Through comprehensive guidance, learners will configure a development
environment, build DApps from scratch and delve into powerful features
such as delayed messages, system signals or gas reservations enabled by
the Gear Protocol.

The course consists of seven engaging, easy-to-understand lessons that
gradually reveal the features and details of program development on Gear
Protocol.

[Code Placeholder]

At the end of each lesson, learners will complete an assignment and
upload it to the platform for review by the Gear Academy instructor. The
course culminates in a final project that combines all the knowledge
gained throughout the course. Upon completion, learners will receive a
certificate and a commemorative gift NFT.

Sign up and enroll in the Gear Academy!

Join Gear and Start Building

[Image Placeholder]

If you're a builder or developer looking to leverage Gear Protocol's
unique capabilities for decentralized and autonomous smart contract
development, join the Gear community. Asynchronous messaging and gas
reservation support enable multiple use cases, facilitating new
decentralized functionality and value for users in the blockchain
ecosystem.

Contact Gear at hello@gear-tech.io to learn more and start collaborating
with the Gear Community.
